Newsletters: add 301 (2024-05-08) (#1645)
bitcoinops/bitcoinops.github.io: _posts/en/newsletters/2024-05-08-newsletter.md

  so please do not implement anything based on this summary.

  Lamport public keys consist of a two lists of hash digests.  Lamport
  signatures consist of the preimages for selected hashes.  A program
  shared between the signer and the validator interprets which preimages
  are revealed as instructions.  For example, Bob wants to verify that
  Alice signed a number between 0 and 31 (in binary, 00000 to 11111).
  Alice private creates a lamport private key from two lists of random
  numbers:

  ```text
  private_zeroes = [random(), random(), random(), random(), random()]
  priavte_ones   = [random(), random(), random(), random(), random()]
  ```

  She hashes each of those private numbers to create her lamport public
  key:

  ```text
  public_zeroes = [private_zeroes[0], ..., private_zeroes[4]]
  public_ones   = [private_ones[0], ..., private_ones[4]]
  ```

  She gives Bob her public key.  Later she wants to verifiably
  communicate the number 21 to him.  She sends the following preimages:

  ```text
  private_ones[0]
  private_zeroes[1]
  private_ones[2]
  private_zeroes[3]
  private_ones[4]
  ```

  In binary, that's 10101, or 21 in decimal.  Bob verifies each of the

>   preimages matches the public key he previously received, assuring him

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  preimages match the public keys he previously received, assuring him
```

  that only Alice with her knowledge of the preimages could have
  generated the message "21".

  For ECDSA signatures, Bitcoin uses the [DER encoding standard][],

>   which omits leading zero (0x00) bytes from the the signature's two

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  which omits leading zero (0x00) bytes from the signature's two
```

  components.  For random values, a 0x00 byte will occur 1/256th of the
  time, so Bitcoin signatures naturally vary in size.  This variation is
  exacerbated by the leading byte for R values being a 0x00 half the
  time (see [low-r grinding][topic low-r grinding]) but, in theory, the

>   variation can be reduced a transaction being one byte smaller 1/256th

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  variation can be reduced by a transaction being one byte smaller 1/256th
```

  of the time.

  Even if a fast quantum computer allows an attacker to create
  signatures without prior knowledge of a private key, ECDSA signature
  will still need to commit to the transaction that contains it, and
  that transaction will still need to include any additional data
  necessary to make it valid, such as hash preimages.

>   This allows the P2SH redeem script to contains an ECDSA signature

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This allows the P2SH redeem script to contain an ECDSA signature
```

  check that will commit to the transaction and a lamport signature that
  commits to the actual size of the ECDSA signature.  For example:

  ```text
  OP_DUP <pubkey> OP_CHECKSIG OP_SIZE <size> OP_EQUAL
  OP_IF
    # Size is equal to <size> bytes
    OP_SHA256 <digest_x> OP_CHECKEQUALVERIFY
  OP_ELSE
    # Size is greater than or less than <size> bytes
    OP_SHA256 <digest_y> OP_CHECKEQUALVERIFY
  OP_ENDIF
  ```

  To satisfy this script fragment, the spender provides an ECDSA
  signature.  The signature is duplicated and validated; the script
  fails if it's not a valid signature.  In a post-quantum world, an
  attacker may be able to pass this test, allowing validation to
  continue.  The size of the duplicate signature is measured.  If it's
  equal to `<size>` bytes (e.g., the most common size), the spender must
  reveal the preimage for `<digest_x>`; otherwise (in the 1/256 case),
  they must reveal the preimage for `<digest_y>`.  If a valid preimage
  for the actual signature size isn't revealed, the script fails.

>   Now even if ECDSA is completely broken, it's not possible for an
>   attacker to spend the bitcoins unless they also know the lamport

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Now even if ECDSA is completely broken, an
  attacker can't spend the bitcoins unless they also know the lamport
```

  private key.  By itself, this isn't very exciting: P2SH and P2WSH
  already have this fundamental property when their script preimages are
  kept secret.  However, after the lamport signature is published, an
  attacker who wants to reuse it with a forged ECDSA signature will have
  to ensure the ECDSA signature is the same length as the original ECDSA

>   signature.  This may require the attacker grind the signature,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  signature.  This may require the attacker to grind the signature,
```

  performing extra operations that an honest user wouldn't need to
  perform.

  The amount of grinding an attacker would need to perform can be
  increased exponentially by including additional pairs of ECDSA and
  lamport signatures.  Unfortunately, because ECDSA signatures only
  naturally vary in byte size one time out of every 256, the
  straightforward way to do this would require a very large number of

>   signatures to be included in order to obtain practical security.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  signatures to be included to obtain practical security.
```

  Heilman [describes][] a much more efficient mechanism.  That mechanism
  still exceeds the consensus limits for P2SH <!-- 520 byte redeem
  script size --> but we think it might just barely work with P2WSH's
  higher limits<!-- 10,000 byte max script size -->.

  Additionally, an individual attacker with a fast quantum computer or a
  sufficiently powerful classical computer could discover a short ECDSA
  nonce that would allow them to easily steal from anyone who didn't
  anticipate a nonce that short.  The minimal size of a nonce is known,
  so the attack is avoidable---however, the private form of that nonce
  is not known, so anyone trying to avoid this attack would be unable to
  spend their own bitcoins until a fast quantum computer was invented.

>   This lamport signature verification is practically similar to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This lamport signature verification is similar to the
```

Author: Leaving as-is.  I want to convey that both accomplish the same thing but that they differ in how they accomplish it.  I also want to leave some wiggle room in case the differences are larger than I expect from my initial reading of the idea.  :-)

  proposed [OP_CHECKSIGFROMSTACK][topic op_checksigfromstack] opcode.

>   In both cases the data to be verified, a public key, and a signature

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  In both cases, the data to be verified, a public key, and a signature
```

  are placed on the stack and an operation only succeeds if the

>   signature both corresponds to public key and commits to the data on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  signature both corresponds to the public key and commits to the data on
```

    puts the transaction into its _orphan pool_.  All versions of
    Bitcoin Core for over a decade have had an orphan pool where they
    temporarily store a limited number of transactions that were
    received before their parents.  This compensates for the fact that,
    on a P2P network, transactions can sometimes naturally be received
    out of order.

  - A few moments later, Alice relays the parent transaction to her
    peer.

  - Before this merged PR, the peer would notice that the parent's
    feerate was too low and refuse to accept it; now that it had
    evaluated the parent transaction, it would also remove
    the child transaction from the orphan pool.  After this PR, the peer
    notices that it has a child for the parent in its orphan pool and
    evaluates aggregate feerate of both transactions together, allowing
    them both into the mempool if that feerate is above its floor (and
    if they're both otherwise acceptable according to the node's local
    policy).

  It's known that this mechanism can be defeated by an attacker.
  Bitcoin Core's orphan pool is a circular buffer that can be added to

>   by all of its peers, so an attacker who want to prevent this type of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  by all of its peers, so an attacker who wants to prevent this type of
```

  package relay can spam peers with many orphan transactions,
  potentially leading to a fee-paying child transaction being evicted
  before it's parent is received.  A [follow-up PR][bitcoin core #27742]
  may give each peer exclusive access to part of the orphan pool to
  eliminate this concern.  Additional improvements requiring changes to
  the P2P protocol are described in [BIP331][].

- [Bitcoin Core #28016][] begins waiting for all seed nodes to be polled
  before polling DNS seeds.  Users can configure both seed nodes and DNS

>   seeds.  A seed node is a regular Bitcoin full node; Bitcoin Core can

Reviewer 2: IIRC, It might be worth distinguishing in the writeup that DNS seed are hard coded and no seed nodes are hard coded. A point you somewhat touch on in the last sentence.

  open a TCP connection to the node, request a list of addresses for
  potential peers, and close the connection.  A DNS seed returns IP
  addresses for potential peers over DNS, allowing that information to
  travel and be cached across the DNS network so the owner of the DNS
  seed server doesn't learn the IP address of the client requesting the
  information.

  Before this PR, if a user configured polling of seed nodes and kept
  the default configuration to also use DNS seeds, they would both be
  contacted in parallel and whichever was faster would dominate the peer
  addresses that the node would try.  Given the lower overhead of DNS

>   and that fact that results might already be cached by a server

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  and the fact that results might already be cached by a server
```

  physically near the user, DNS would usually win.  After this PR, seed
  nodes are given preference under the belief that a user who sets a
  non-default option would prefer the results of that option over
  default results.

- [Bitcoin Core #29623][] makes various improvements to warning users if
  their local time seems to be more than 10 minutes out of sync with the

>   time of their connected peers.  A node with a bad clock might

Reviewer 2: Think referencing this PR could be helpful for readers not already familiar with it:
https://bitcoinops.org/en/newsletters/2024/02/07/#bitcoin-core-28956

permalink: /en/newsletters/2024/05/08/
name: 2024-05-08-newsletter
slug: 2024-05-08-newsletter
type: newsletter
layout: newsletter
lang: en
---
This week's newsletter summarizes FIXME

## News

- **Consensus-enforced lamport signatures on top of ECDSA signatures:**
  Ethan Heilman [posted][] to the Bitcoin-Dev mailing list a method for
  requiring a transaction be signed by a [lamport signature][] in order
  to be valid.  This can make spends of P2SH and P2WSH outputs [quantum
  resistant][] and, [according][poelstra lamport] to Andrew Poelstra
  means "that size limits are now the only reason that Bitcoin doesn't
  have covenants."  We'll summarize the protocol below, but to keep our
  description simple and clear, we will omit several security warnings,
  so please do not implement anything based on this summary.

  Lamport public keys consist of a two lists of hash digests.  Lamport
  signatures consist of the preimages for selected hashes.  A program
  shared between the signer and the validator interprets which preimages
  are revealed as instructions.  For example, Bob wants to verify that
  Alice signed a number between 0 and 31 (in binary, 00000 to 11111).

>   Alice private creates a lamport private key from two lists of random

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Alice creates a lamport private key from two lists of random
```

  numbers:

  ```text
  private_zeroes = [random(), random(), random(), random(), random()]
  priavte_ones   = [random(), random(), random(), random(), random()]
  ```

  She hashes each of those private numbers to create her lamport public
  key:

  ```text

>   public_zeroes = [private_zeroes[0], ..., private_zeroes[4]]
>   public_ones   = [private_ones[0], ..., private_ones[4]]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  public_zeroes = [hash(private_zeroes[0]), ..., hash(private_zeroes[4])]
  public_ones   = [hash(private_ones[0]), ..., hash(private_ones[4])]
```

Author: Oof, thanks so much for this!  I guess this is why I mainly write documentation, not code!  :-)

      orphanage."
  a3link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/30000#l-60"

  q4="Instead of allowing multiple transactions with the same txid
      (where we are obviously wasting some space on a version we will
      not accept), should we allow a transaction to replace an existing
      entry in the TxOrphanage? What would be the requirements for
      replacement?"
  a4="It appears there is no good metric by which to judge whether a
      transaction should be allowed to replace an existing one. One
      potential avenue to explore is to replace duplicated transactions
      from the same peer only."
  a4link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/30000#l-80"
%}

## Releases and release candidates

*New releases and release candidates for popular Bitcoin infrastructure
projects.  Please consider upgrading to new releases or helping to test
release candidates.*

- [Libsecp256k1 v0.5.0][] is a release of this library for performing
  Bitcoin-related cryptographic operations.  It speeds up key generation
  and signing (see [last week's newsletter][news300 secp]) and reduces
  the compiled size "which we expect to benefit embedded users in

>   particular."  It also adds a function for sorting pulic keys.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  particular."  It also adds a function for sorting public keys.
```

Author: Fixed, thanks @azuchi!
